Introduction Section (#7)
3mdeb/verified-boot: verified_boot_main.md

# Verified Boot

## 1. Introduction

The purpose of this section is to define the fundamental concepts and key
terminology that will be utilized throughout the document.
A clear understanding of them is essential for ensuring consistency and
precision.

### Trust, chain of trust, root of trust

#### Trust

> A characteristic of an entity that indicates its ability to perform certain
functions or services correctly, fairly and impartially, along with assurance
that the entity and its identifier are genuine.

~ NIST SP 800-152, Appendix B, Glossary [^NIST_sp800-152]:

> The confidence one element has in another that the second element will behave
as expected.

~ NISTIR 8320, section 1.2 Terminology, under "Trust" [^NIST_ir8320]

It's worth noting that the "element" or "entity" in these definitions might
not only be a software or hadware component, but also a person or an organization

> as well. A person using their computer **Trusts** the its hardware, software,

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/a6602f9%5E..a6602f9#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655L27-R27

- 175-192 "When the Verification is over?"
- 869-874 "See Also

The purpose of this section is to define the fundamental concepts and key
terminology that will be utilized throughout the document.
A clear understanding of them is essential for ensuring consistency and

> precision throughout the document.

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/b458b23%5E..b458b23

are anchored in a Root of Trust (RoT) that extend the trust boundary
of the current element by conveying the same trust properties to the
next element when it passes it control. The result is both elements
are equally able to fulfill the trusted function as though they were a
single trusted element. This process can be continued, further
extending the chain of trust. Once control is passed to code which is
not, or cannot be, verified then the Chain of Trust has ended. This is
also referred to as passing control to a non-cooperative element.

~ NIST SP 800-193, Appendix B - Glossary, under "Chain of Trust (CoT)" [^NIST_sp800-193]

> A method for maintaining valid trust boundaries by
applying a principle of transitive trust, where each
software module in a system boot process is required
to measure the next module before transitioning
control.

~ NIST IR 8320, Appendix H - Glossary, under "Chain of Trust (CoT)" [^NIST_ir8320] -->

### Categorization of chains/roots of trust

Multiple **Chains** and **Roots** of trust can be distinguished depending on the
context of the conversation, the desired level of abstraction over the

> mechanisms of the boot process, and the recognised functionalities of firmware.

Author: I meant that for example the Root of Trust for Measurement can be split into Static and Dynamic RoTMs.

> mechanisms of the boot process, and the recognised functionalities of firmware.

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/bc950fe%5E..bc950fe

trust for reporting (RTR), and root of trust for storage (RTS). They are the foundational elements
of a single platform. These are the system elements that must be trusted because misbehavior in
these normally would not be detectable in the higher layers.

~ NIST IR 8320, Appendix A, section 2, Hardware Root of Trust: Intel TXT and Trusted Platform Module (TPM) [^NIST_sp800-193] -->

#### RTM (Root of Trust for Measurements)

The **Root of Trust for Measurements (RTM)** is the first hardware, firmware, or
software component able to measure the integrity of other components, and to
document the history of the measurements.[^TCG_glossary] [^NIST_sp800-155]
It is the **Root of Trust** for the **Chain of Trust** of all the components
performing integrity measurements.
The history of measurements and the digests of the measured components
need to be saved in a tamper-resistant log, the integrity and authenticity of
which can be verified.

The **Root of Trust for Measurements** is the most important component for
performing the process of **measured boot**.

The **Root of Trust for Measurements** is a broad component that is often

> logically separated into smaller parts like:

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/83322ba635bf%5E..83322ba635bf

Need to read the documents in detail -->

<!--
Based on:

> An RoT that makes the initial integrity measurement, and adds it to a tam-
per-resistant log.

~ Trusted Computing Group Glossary, Version 1.1, rev 1.0 [^TCG_glossary]

> A computing engine capable of making inherently reliable
integrity measurements. The RTM is the root of the chain of transitive trust for subsequent measurement agents.

~ NIST SP800-155, section 3.6.4, Appendix B - Glossary [^NIST_sp800-155] -->

##### S-RTM (Static Root of Trust for Measurements)

The **Static Root of Trust for Measurements (S-RTM)** is the root of trust
for

> An RTM where the initial integrity measurement occurs at platform reset.
The S-RTM is static because the PCRs associated with it cannot be re-ini-
tialized without a platform reset.

~ Trusted Computing Group Glossary, Version 1.1, rev 1.0 [^TCG_glossary]

##### D-RTM (Dynamic Root of Trust for Measurements)

> A platform-dependent function that initializes the state of the platform and
provides a new instance of a root of trust for measurement without rebooting
the platform. The initial state establishes a minimal Trusted Computing

> Base.

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/45ff2c3%5E..45ff2c3

~ Trusted Computing Group Glossary, Version 1.1, rev 1.0 [^TCG_glossary]

> The D-RTM, if supported by the platform, may start at
any point after boot by initializing the state of the platform without requiring
a reboot. In general, the D-RTM launches after an S-RTM, but the trust-chains

> anchored in each RTM are independent,

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/7f19444%5E..7f19444#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655L106-R106

~ Trusted Computing Group, TCG PC Client Platform Firmware Integrity
Measurement, V1.0, rev 43, 3.1.2 Overview of Roots of Trust

##### CRTM (Core Root of Trust for Measurements)

> > The first piece of BIOS code that executes on the main

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/83322ba%5E..83322ba

~ Trusted Computing Group Glossary, Version 1.1, rev 1.0 [^TCG_glossary]

> Security should extend across all tiers of the container technology. The
current way of accomplishing this is to base security on a hardware root of
trust, such as the industry standard Trusted Platform Module (TPM). Within the
hardware root of trust are stored measurements of the host’s firmware, software,
and configuration data.

~ NIST SP800-190 [^NIST_sp800-190]

#### RTR (Root of Trust for Reporting)

> The RoT for Reporting (RTR) is a RoT that reliably provides authenticity and
non-repudiation services for the purpose of attesting to the origin and
integrity of platform characteristics. It necessarily leverages the RTM and
RTS. A principal function of the RTR is to provide an unambiguous identity,
statistically unique for the endpoint in the form of an Attestation Key (AK).
The AK may be persistent or temporary. A typical usage of the AK in this
instance involves a TPM2_Quote of the TPM PCRs signed by the AK that may be
accompanied by a certificate.

~ Trusted Computing Group, TCG PC Client Platform Firmware Integrity
Measurement, V1.0, rev 43, 3.1.2 Overview of Roots of Trust

> > A computing engine capable of reliably reporting information

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/37e7c99%5E..37e7c99

provided by the RTM and its measurement agent(s) or held by the RTS.

~ NIST SP800-155, section 3.6.4, Appendix B - Glossary [^NIST_sp800-155]

<!-- TODO I can't say more for now. Need to read the documents in detail to know

> what exactly it is. Some code to verify integrity&authenticity and/or key store?-->

Reviewer: Not necessarily code, in general this may be more than that, including code, hardware and math behind the cryptography. It is something that guaranties that data obtained from RTS-protected medium (in case of TPM, its NVRAM) will be reliably presented only to an authorized entity.

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/5eecda0%5E..5eecda0
I think the definitions failed to point out what the "reporting" means, that it's used to document the measurements performed and can be used to verify if the integrity of the system was compromited

#### RTS (Root of Trust for Storage)

> A computing engine capable of maintaining a tamper-evident
summary of integrity measurement values and the sequence of those measurements.

~ NIST SP800-155, section 3.6.4, Appendix B - Glossary [^NIST_sp800-155]

> TCG defines the RoT for Storage (RTS) as the combination of a
RoT for Confidentiality (RTC) and a RoT for Integrity (RTI). The RTS provides
for confidentiality and integrity of data stored in TPM shielded locations.
In the context of this specification, the RTS maintains a tamper-evident
summary of the integrity measurement values and the sequence of those
measurements. It does not include the details of the sequence of integrity
measurements, but rather holds cumulative integrity results for those sequences.
These cumulative integrity values can either be used to verify the integrity of
a log containing the integrity measurement values and the sequence of those
measurements, or it can be used as a proxy for that log.

~ Trusted Computing Group, TCG PC Client Platform Firmware Integrity
Measurement, V1.0, rev 43, 3.1.2 Overview of Roots of Trust

<!-- TODO I can't say more for now. Need to read the documents in detail

> Is it just an encrypted data store?-->

Reviewer: Not "just", encryption by itself (depending on algorithm) may only protect confidentiality, but not always integrity of data. This is encryption + some kind of integrity (e.g. checksum, which may be part of encryption) + fault tolerant storage.

Author: I think there is not much more to add then. 
https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/4998b5d%5E..4998b5d
Do we keep this added description?

#### RTV (Root of Trust for Verification)

> ### The difference between verified boot and measured boot

Reviewer: Why this section was moved?

Author: I thought it might make sense to first say what digests and signatures are before a section that would use these terms.

~ Trusted Computing Group Glossary, Version 1.1, rev 1.0 [^TCG_glossary]

> The core RoT for verification (CRTV) is responsible for verifying the first
component before control is passed to it.

~ NIST IR 8320, section 3.2 The Chain of Trust (CoT) [^NIST_ir8320]

> <!-- TODO I can't say more for now. Need to read the documents in detail

Reviewer: RTV/CTV has to be able to:

- check the authenticity of next component
  - includes locating and reading
  - either calculate a digest or parse the signature (which also contains a digest)
- authorizes (or not) the execution of the next component
  - follows some kind of policy
  - usually compares digest/signature against some kind of database

Author: NIST only defines the "**Core** Root of Trust for Verification" which seems to be something different.
Ive found a definition from ARM https://documentation-service.arm.com/static/65e84577837c4d065f655931?token= section 4.5 and from Intel https://www.intel.com/content/dam/develop/external/us/en/documents/platform-security-review-intel-cisco-white-paper-820238.pdf section 10, under "Secure Boot". Would basing on them be better than the possibly unrelated NIST definition, or the one from TCG?

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/424c1b9%5E..424c1b9

Reviewer: I like the way it is described in ARM, we can use that. BTW, this document (e.g. figure 3) may be used in one of the later sections that will list different implementations of verified boot.

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/a6602f9%5E..a6602f9#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655R198-R203

RTC seems to be similar to RTR.
RTR - Integrity+authenticity of data
RTC - Integrity+authenticity of software components-->

### Difference between integrity and authenticity verification
- 448-450 "Custom Hardware with Specific Keys"
- 574-583 "Verified Boot for User but not for Admin"

#### Integrity Verification

> Integrity:

Reviewer: Please add an empty line between text and quote blocks, here and in next definitions, some renderers require it.

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/8351bb5%5E..8351bb5

It is computationally infeasible to find any input that maps to any
pre-specified output. 2. Collision resistant – It is computationally
infeasible to find any two distinct inputs that map to the same output.

~ NIST SP 800-175, section 1.5 Terms and Definitions [^NIST_sp800-175]

To verify the integrity of the data, the digest has to be calculated once
more and compared against the one received.
When creating digests using a strong hash function, even the
smallest change to the data will result in a completely different value
of the digest and chaning the data in such a way that won't change the
digest is not feasible computationally.

Only verifying integrity does not guarantee the origin of the data is
genuine. A bad actor could modify both the data and the digest if the digest
is not protected or already known from a different source.

#### Authenticity

> The property of being genuine and being able to be verified and trusted;
confidence in the validity of a transmission, a message, or message originator.

~ NIST SP 800-137, Appendix B Glossary [^NIST_sp800-137]

Verifying authenticity is verifying the identity of an entity.

> It is performed using asymetric cryptography. The private key of an asymmetric

Reviewer: Not necessarily, in case of UEFI SB the authenticity can be proven based on digest alone.

```suggestion
It is performed by comparing the digest against known one, or by using asymmetric cryptography. The private key of an asymmetric
```

Please also explain at the end of this section that contrary to integrity, in this case the digest can't be provided together with the data, it has to be known in advance.

Author: > Not necessarily, in case of UEFI SB the authenticity can be proven based on digest alone.

How? By storing the well known digests in a secured store, like verification keys?

Reviewer: Yes, db/dbx can hold both certificates and hashes.

~ NIST FIPS 186-5 [^NIST_fips186-5]

Non repudiation is a term used to describe a data, of which both the
integrity and the authenticity of some entity responsible for it
can be verified.
Non repudiation is generally achieved using some form of digital
signature.

Digital Signature
>  A cryptographic technique that utilizes asymmetric-keys to determine
authenticity (i.e., users can verify that the message was signed with a private
key corresponding to the specified public key), non-repudiation (a user cannot
deny having sent a message) and integrity (that the message was not altered
during transmission).

~ NIST SP 800-63, Appendix A - Deifinitions and Abbreviations [^NIST_sp800-63]

A basic digital signature is a digest of data, that has been encrypted using the
private key of some entity.
Verifying a signature requires:
- The data in plaintext
- The digital signature of the data
- The public key corresponding to the private key of the signer
- Knowledge of the hash function used to calculate the digest and the type of
assymetric keys used by the signer

> <!-- TODO? digest is not necesarry, it just saves some time if the data is large, because asym. crypt. is slow -->

Reviewer: You can't depend on digest provided by external party, it must be calculated locally to ensure the integrity.

Author: I am not sure what you mean by that here, for digital signatures.
In the comment I meant, that in theory the signature could just be the whole data encrypted using the private key and the fact that typically it's the digest that is signed is an optimization, because signing a digest is good enough. I don't know if encrypting the data instead of a digest is done anywhere, even if it could make sense, that's why I left it as a note.

If some external party did not provide a digest, then what should the calculated one be compared to? Something/someone has to decide what digests are expected. For example don't change between reboots. In that case the "external party" could be the storage agent and the digest from the previous boot securely saved on the hard drive. That would require the storage agent (TPM?) to sign the digest.

Reviewer: > I think you've meant it the other way around. Encrypting with a public key can be used to send a private message, like exchanging symmetric keys. Not for signing anything,

Yes, I wasn't sure what you meant by encrypting. The operation done during signing, while works more or less as encrypting, usually isn't called that.

> Is there anything wrong in the text that should be fixed?

No, it looks fine, I just wanted to be sure that we understand each other.

The process consists of:
- calculating the digest using the same hash function as used by the signer
- decrypting the signature using signer's public key to receive the digest in
  plaintext
- comparing the two values

The verification of the signature succeeds if both digests are exactly the same.
If the verification succeeds then:
- Integrity is verified. The received digest is the same as the one
calculated from the datum. The data did not change
<!-- TODO? only if the used hash function is safe? -->
- Authenticity is verified. Only the one in possession of the corresponding
private key could have encrypted the digest so that it can be decrypted using

> the public key

Reviewer: This is valid, but slightly off topic. Let's keep it for now, but if the document becomes too long, this may be the first thing to be removed.

to verify the trust to some other component. A **Chain of Trust** is not
a physical construct kept in memory, but a history of trust transitioning during
the lifetime of a computer system. Once a trusted component passes control to
one that is not verified to be trusted, the **Chain of Trust** ends.
[^NIST_sp800-193_glossary] [^NIST_ir8320_glossary]

#### Trusted Computing Base (TCB)

> Totality of protection mechanisms within a computer
system, including hardware, firmware, and software, the
combination responsible for enforcing a security policy.

~ CNSSI 4009, Commitee on National Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary [^CNSSI_4009]

The meaning of the Trusted Computing Base is different from a Chain of Trust,
in that a Chain of Trust means a sequence of components, that transition their
trust onto each other without necesarilly specifying the role of the components.
The Trusted Computing Base, on the other hand, refers to all of the hardware,
firmware and software components that play a crucial role in the system's
security, without specifying any relations between them.

> The components belonging to the Trusted Computing Group include a number of the

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/a6602f9%5E..a6602f9#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655R70

initial elements of all the Chains of Trust in a system, and the Roots of Trust
in particular - the elements which form the "Base" for providing security

> functionalities.

Reviewer: Not always, at every point of time TCB consists of what was necessary to get to a given point. When next CoT component gets loaded, it is appended to TCB, but not earlier.

> functionalities.

Author: @krystian-hebel 
Next CoT component, that gives some functionality related to trust?
Are you saying that every component, that at a given moment is loaded and a part of *some* CoT, is a part of TCB? Because if that's so then I've misunderstood something:
```
The components belonging to the Trusted Computing Base include **a number** of the
**initial** elements of all the Chains of Trust in a system (...)
```
Suggests that not every link of a CoT has to be a part of the TCB

system, including hardware, firmware, and software, the
combination responsible for enforcing a security policy.

~ CNSSI 4009, Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary [^CNSSI_4009]

The meaning of the Trusted Computing Base is different from a Chain of Trust,
in that a Chain of Trust means a sequence of components, that transition their
trust onto each other without necesarily specifying the role of the components.
The Trusted Computing Base, on the other hand, refers to all the hardware,
firmware and software components that play a crucial role in the system's
security, without specifying any relations between them.

The Trusted Computing Base, just like the Chain of Trust, can consist of

> a different number of software components at any given point in the process

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/8081b21%5E..8081b21#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655R71

##### S-RTM (Static Root of Trust for Measurements)

> An RTM where the initial integrity measurement occurs at platform reset.
The S-RTM is static because the PCRs associated with it cannot be reini

> tialized without a platform reset.

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/8081b21%5E..8081b21#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655R122

during the boot process and decide whether the sequence is expected or
if a potential security threat happened.

> #### Comparison of verified boot and measured boot

Author: Let me yank this pretty sentence :)
https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/8081b21%5E..8081b21#diff-3f3cfef590743af79e56bf6aa2508d5d3ce7f08fcf1a856ff8ecd10d4df3e655R225-R226

|Criterion|verified boot|measured boot|
|--|--|--|
|Short description|Verifies code signatures before passing execution|Documents what code was executed|

> |Security benefits|Only verified software will be executed|It can be determined if something unexpected and potentially dangerous was already executed|

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/1736ce4%5E..1736ce4

> |Required RoTs and CoTs|Measurement and Verification|Measurement, Storage and Reporting|

Author: I don't think it's said anywhere explicitly. The two terms are often used together and it seemed logical that calculating digests, which is provided by the RTM, is required for verifying integrity and authenticity.

```
> An RoT that verifies an integrity measurement against a policy

~ Trusted Computing Group Glossary, Version 1.1, rev 1.0 [^TCG_glossary]
```

Do you mean, that there is no reason for the RTV not to implement it's own means of measurements?

> |Required RoTs and CoTs|Measurement and Verification|Measurement, Storage and Reporting|

Reviewer: Even with measured CoT, later stages usually use their own code for calculating digests. With TPM, first pieces of code are usually sent to the TPM and measured by it, but this is very slow, mostly because of interface towards the TPM. For this reason, IBB, bootblock or whatever it is called in the implementation is made as small as possible. Later stages calculate the digest in software and send just that digest to the TPM, it is much better to send few dozen bytes than few dozen megabytes wherever possible. To give some numbers, in early AEM implementation I tried to send dom0 kernel (~8MB) to the TPM in order to not have to implement SHA1/SHA256 at that point, and it took ~10 minutes.

What I tried to say in previous paragraph, it is not the root that does the measuring at later stages. It can be the same with RTV - earlier stages may use cheaper (in code size, hardware requirements, speed) mechanisms than the later ones. Because of that, there is nothing to be gained by relying on RTM just for calculating the digests.

> |Required RoTs and CoTs|Measurement and Verification|Measurement, Storage and Reporting|

Author: The measurements implemented in software still depend on the RTM as their code has to be measured to make it a part of the CTM, right? So it depends on the RTM?

Or is it that the code used for measuring for the purpose of verification doesn't need to have anything in common with the RTM and CTM?

What should I change? Remove RTM from the verified boot column?

> |Required RoTs and CoTs|Measurement and Verification|Measurement, Storage and Reporting|

Reviewer: It only depends on root if it is part of the same chain. In case of verified boot, it is perfectly valid to have the initial part of firmware being verified by HW (e.g. Intel Boot Guard), and that part can have the code for calculating hashes for the sake of verification of further stages. No RTM needed, so it should be removed from that column.

(In fact, a lot of the RTMs other than TPM SRTM are authenticated by some kind of verified boot, but this also is an implementation choice and not dependency)

> |Required RoTs and CoTs|Measurement and Verification|Measurement, Storage and Reporting|

Author: OK, its clear to me now, thanks
https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/compare/1736ce4ac4f769afdd90074671a85b500f2e1b85..74a29e088d64bd23736a4ab0395e30de3b6e52bc
